Welcome, sweet prince, toLondon, to your chamber.
Welcome, dear cousin, mythoughts' sovereign.
The weary way hath madeyou melancholy.
No, Uncle, but our crosseson the way
have made it tedious,wearisome, and heavy.
I want more uncles here towelcome me.
Sweet prince, the untaintedvirtue of your years
hath not yet dived intothe world's deceit.
Nor more can youdistinguish of a man thanof his outward show,
which God, he knows,
seldom or never jumpethwith the heart.
Those uncles which youwant were dangerous.
Your grace attended totheir sugared words
but looked not on thepoison of their hearts.
God keep you from them andfrom such false friends.
God keep me from falsefriends.
But they were none.
My lord, the mayor ofLondon comes to greet you.
God bless your grace withhealth and happy days.
I thank you, good my lord,and thank you all.
I thought my mother and mybrother York
would long ere this havemet us on the way.
Fie, what a slug isHastings, that he comesnot to tell us
whether they will come orno.
And in good time, herecomes the sweating lord.
Welcome, my lord.
What, will our mothercome?
On what occasion, God heknows, not I,
the queen your mother andyour brother York
have taken sanctuary.
The tender prince wouldfain have come with me
to meet your grace
but by his mother wasperforce withheld.
Fie, what an indirect andpeevish course
is this of hers.
Lord cardinal, will yourgrace persuade the queen
to send the Duke of York
unto his princely brotherpresently?
If she deny, LordHastings, go with him
and from her jealous armspluck him perforce.
My lord of Buckingham, ifmy weak oratory
can from his mother winthe Duke of York,
anon expect him here.
But if she be obdurate tomild entreaties,
God in Heaven forbid
we should infringe the holyprivilege of blessedsanctuary.
Not for all this landwould I be guilty of sodeep a sin.
You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord,
too ceremonious andtraditional.
Weigh it but with thegrossness of this age.
You break not sanctuary inseizing him.
The benefit thereof isalways granted
to those whose dealingshave deserved the place
and those who have the witto claim the place.
This prince hath neitherclaimed it nor deserved it
and therefore, in mineopinion, cannot have it.
Then taking him fromthence that is not there,
you break no privilege norcharter there.
Oft have I heard ofsanctuary men,
but sanctuary children...
Never till now.
My lord, you shallo'errule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings;will you go with me?
I go, my lord.
Good lords...
Make all the speedy hasteyou may.
Say, Uncle Gloucester...
If our brother come,
where shall we sojourntill our coronation?
Where it seems best untoyour royal self.
If I may counsel you, someday or two,
your highness shall reposeyou at the Tower,
then where you please andshall be thought most fit
for your best health andrecreation.
I do not like the tower ofany place.
Did Julius Caesar buildthat place, my lord?
He did, my gracious lord,begin that place,
which since succeedingages have re-edified.
Is it upon record or elsereported successively
from age to age, he builtit?
Upon record, my graciouslord.
But say, my lord, it werenot registered,
methinks the truth shouldlive from age to age,
as 'twere retailed to allposterity,
even to the generalall-ending day.
So wise so young, theysay, do ne'er live long.
What say you, Uncle?
I say without characters,fame lives long.
That Julius Caesar was afamous man.
With what his valor didenrich his wit,
his wit set down to makehis valor live.
Death makes no conquest ofthis conqueror,
for now he lives in fame,though not in life.
I'll tell you what, mycousin Buckingham.
What, my gracious lord?
An if I live until I be aman,
I'll win our ancient rightin France again
or die a soldier as Ilived a king.
Short summers lightly havea forward spring.
Now in good time, herecomes the Duke of York.
Richard of York.
How fares our lovingbrother?
Well, my dread lord; somust I call you now.
Aye, brother, to ourgrief, as it is yours.
Too late he died thatmight have kept that title
which by his death hathlost much majesty.
How fares our cousin,noble lord of York?
I thank you, gentle uncle.
O, my lord, you said that idleweeds are fast in growth.
The prince my brother hathoutgrown me far.
He hath, my lord.
And therefore, is he idle?
O, my fair cousin, I mustnot say so.
Then is he more beholdingto you than I.
He may command me as mysovereign,
but you have power in meas in a kinsman.
I pray you, uncle, give methis dagger.
My dagger, little cousin?
With all my heart.
A beggar, brother?
Of my kind uncle, that Iknow will give
and being but a toy, whichis no grief to give.
A greater gift than thatI'll give my cousin.
A greater gift.
Then that's the sword toit.
Aye, gentle cousin, wereit light enough.
O, then I see you will butpart with light gifts.
In weightier things,you'll say a beggar nay.
It is too heavy for yourgrace to wear.
I weigh it lightly, wereit heavier.
What? Would you have myweapon, little lord?
I would, that I mightthank you as you call me.
How?
Little.
My lord of York will stillbe cross in talk.
Uncle, your grace knowshow to bear with him.
You mean to bear me, notto bear with me.
Uncle, my brother mocksboth you and me.
Because that I am littlelike an ape,
he thinks that you shouldbear me on your shoulders.
With what a sharp-providedwit he reasons.
To mitigate the scorn hegives his uncle,
he prettily and aptlytaunts himself.
So cunning and so young iswonderful.
My lord, will it pleaseyou pass along?
Myself and my good cousinBuckingham will to your mother
to entreat of her to meetyou at the Tower andwelcome you.
What? Will you go unto theTower, my lord?
My lord protector needswill have it so.
I shall not sleep in quietat the Tower.
Why? What should you fear?
Marry, my uncle Clarence'angry ghost.
My grandam told me he wasmurdered there.
I fear no uncles dead.
Nor none that live, Ihope.
An if they live, I hope Ineed not fear.
But come, my lord.
With a heavy heart,thinking on them,
go I unto the Tower.
Think you, my lord, thislittle prating York
was not incensed by hissubtle mother
to taunt and scorn youthus opprobriously?
No doubt, no doubt.
O, 'tis a parlous boy:
bold, quick, ingenious,forward, capable.
He is all the mother'sfrom the top to toe.
Well, let them rest.
Come hither, Catesby.
Thou art sworn as deeplyto effect what we intend
as closely to conceal whatwe impart.
What think'st thou?
Is it not an easy matter
to make William LordHastings of our mind
for the installment ofthis noble duke
in the seat royal of thisfamous isle?
He for his father's sakeso loves the prince
that he will not be won toaught against him.
What think'st thou, then,of Stanley?
What will he?
He will do all in all asHastings doth.
Well, then, no more butthis.
Go, gentle Catesby.
And as it were far off,sound thou Lord Hastings,
how he doth stand affectedto our purpose.
And summon him tomorrow tothe Tower
to sit about thecoronation.
If thou dost find himtractable to us,
encourage him, and tellhim all our reasons.
If he be leaden, icy-cold,unwilling,
be thou so too and sobreak off the talk
and give us notice of hisinclination,
for we tomorrow holddivided councils
wherein thyself shallhighly be employed.
Commend me to LordHastings.
Tell him, Catesby,
his ancient knot ofdangerous adversaries
tomorrow are let blood atPomfret Castle.
And bid my lord for joy ofthis good news
give Mistress Shore onegentle kiss the more.
Good Catesby, go; effectthis business soundly.
My good lords both, withall the heed I can.
Shall we hear from you,Catesby, ere we sleep?
You shall, my lord.
At Crosby Place, thereshall you find us both.
Now, my lord, what shallwe do
if we perceive LordHastings will not yield toour complots?
Chop off his head, man.
Somewhat we will do.
And look, when I am king,
claim thou of me theearldom of Hereford
and all the movables
whereof the king mybrother was possessed.
I'll claim that promise atyour grace's hands.
And look to have ityielded with all kindness.
Come, let us sup betimes,
that afterwards, we may digestour complots in some form.
My lord.
Who knocks?
One from the Lord Stanley.
What is't o'clock?
Upon the stroke of four.
Cannot my Lord Stanleysleep these tedious nights?
So it appears by that Ihave to say.
First, he commends him tothe noble sir.
And what then?
Then sends upon yourlordship that this night,
he dreamt the boar hadrazed off his helm.
Besides, he says there aretwo councils kept
and that may be determinedat the one
which may make you and himto rue at the other.
Therefore he sends to knowyour lordship's pleasure,
if you will presently takehorse with him
and with all speed postwith him toward the north
and shun the danger thathis soul divines.
Go, fellow, go.
Return unto thy lord.
Bid him not fear theseparated council.
His honor and myself areat the one,
and at the other is mygood friend Catesby,
where nothing can proceedthat toucheth us
whereof I shall not haveintelligence.
Tell him his fears areshallow, without instance.
And for his dreams, Iwonder he is so simple
to trust the mockery ofunquiet slumbers.
To fly the boar before theboar pursues
were to incense the boarto follow us
and make pursuit where hedid mean no chase.
Go.
Bid thy master rise andcome to me,
and we will both togetherto the Tower,
where he shall see, theboar will use us kindly.
I'll go, my lord, and tellhim what you say.
Oh.
Many good morrows to mynoble lord.
Good morrow, Catesby.
You are early stirring.
What news?
What news, in this, ourtottering state?
O, it is a reeling worldindeed, my lord.
And I believe 'twill neverstand upright
till Richard wear thegarland of the realm.
How wear the garland?
O, dost thou mean thecrown?
Aye, my good lord.
I'll have this crown ofmine cut from my shoulders
before I'll see the crownso foul misplaced.
But canst thou guess thathe doth aim at it?
Aye, on my life.
And hopes to find youforward upon his party
for the gain thereof.
And thereupon he sends youthis good news:
that this same very day,your enemies,
the kindred of the queen,must die at Pomfret.
Indeed, I am no mournerfor this news...
Because they have beenstill my adversaries.
But that I'll give myvoice on Richard's side,
to bar my master's heirsin true descent,
God knows I will not doit.
To the death.
God keep your lordship inthat gracious mind.
But I shall laugh at thisa twelve-month hence,
that they which brought mein my master's hate,
I live to look upon theirtragedy.
O, Catesby.
Ere a fortnight make meolder,
I'll send some packingthat yet think not on't.
'Tis a vile thing to die,my gracious lord,
when men are unpreparedand look not for it.
O monstrous, monstrous.
So falls it out withRivers, Vaughan, Grey.
And so 'twill do with somemen else
who think themselves assafe as thou and I,
who, as thou know'st,
are dear to princelyRichard and to Buckingham.
The princes both make highaccount of you,
for they account his headupon the bridge.
I know they do.
And I have well deservedit.
Come on, come on.
Where is your boar spear,man?
Fear you the boar and goso unprovided?
My lord, good morrow.
Morrow, Catesby.
You may jest on, but bythe holy rood,
I do not like theseseveral councils, I...
My lord, I hold my life asdear as you.
And never in my days, I doprotest,
was it so precious to meas 'tis now.
Think you but that I knowour state secure,
I would be so triumphantas I am?
The lords at Pomfret,
when they rode fromLondon, were jocund
and supposed their stateswere sure,
and they indeed had nocause to mistrust,
and yet you see how soonthe day o'ercast.
This sudden stab of rancorI misdoubt.
Pray God, I say, I prove aneedless coward.
What, shall we toward theTower?
The night is spent.
Come, come; have with you.
Wot you what, my lord?
Today the lords you talkedof are beheaded.
They for their truth mightbetter wear their heads
than some that have accusedthem wear their hats.
Come, my lord; let's away.
Go on before.
I'll talk with this goodfellow.
Well met, Hastings.
How goes the world withthee?
The better that yourlordship please to ask.
I tell thee, man, 'tisbetter with me now
than when I met thee last.
Where now we meet,
then was I going prisonerto the Tower
by the suggestion of thequeen's allies.
But now I tell thee-- keepit to thyself--
this day, those enemiesare put to death,
and I in better state thane'er I was.
God hold it to yourhonor's good content.
Gramercy, Hastings.
There.
Drink that for me.
Why, thank you, Robert.
Well met, my lord.
I am glad to see yourhonor.
I thank you kindly, goodSir John.
I am in your debt for yourlast exercise.
Come the next Sabbath, Iwill content you.
What, talking with apriest, lord chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret,they do need the priest.
Your honor hath noshriving work in hand.
Good faith, and when I metthis holy man,
the men you talked of cameinto my mind.
What, go you toward theTower?
I do, my lord.
But long I cannot staythere.
I shall return before yourlordship thence.
Hey, like enough, for Istay dinner there.
And supper too, althoughthou know'st it not.
I'll wait upon yourlordship.
Come. Shall we go?
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, letme tell thee this:
Today shalt thou behold asubject die
for truth, for duty, andfor loyalty!
God bless the prince fromall the pack of you.
A knot you are of damnedbloodsuckers!
You live that shall crywoe for this hereafter!
Dispatch; the limit ofyour lives is out.
O Pomfret, Pomfret!
O thou bloody prison,
fatal and ominous to noblepeers.
Within the guilty closureof thy walls,
Richard II here was hackedto death.
And for more slander tothy dismal seat,
we give to thee ourguiltless blood to drink.
Now Margaret's curse isfallen upon our heads
when she exclaimed onHastings, you, and I,
for standing by whenRichard stabbed her son.
Then cursed she Richard.
Then cursed sheBuckingham.
Then cursed she Hastings.
O, remember, God,
to hear her prayer forthem as now for us
and for my sister and herprincely sons.
Be satisfied, dear God,with our true blood,
which, as thou know'st,unjustly must be spilt.
Make haste.
The hour of death isexpiate.
Come, Grey.
Come, Vaughan.
Let us here embrace.
Farewell until we meetagain in Heaven.
Now, noble peers, thecause why we are met
is to determine of thecoronation.
In God's name, speak.
When is the royal day?
Is all things ready forthe royal time?
It is, and wants butnomination.
Tomorrow, then, I judgethe happy day.
Who knows the lordprotector's mind herein?
Who is most inward withthe noble duke?
Your grace, we think, shouldsoonest know his mind.
We know each other'sfaces.
For our hearts,
he knows no more of minethan I of yours
or I of his, my lord, thanyou of mine.
Lord Hastings, you and heare near in love.
I thank his grace. I knowhe loves me well.
But for his purpose in thecoronation,
I have not sounded him,
nor he delivered his graciouspleasure any way therein.
But you, my honorablelords, may name the time,
and in the duke's behalf,I'll give my voice,
which, I presume, he'lltake in gentle part.
Ah, in happy time, herecomes the duke himself.
My noble lords and cousinsall, good morrow.
I have been long asleeper.
But I trust my absence dothneglect no great design
which by my presence mighthave been concluded.
Had not you come upon yourcue, my lord,
William, Lord Hastings,had pronounced your part--
I mean, your voice-- forcrowning of the king.
Than my lord Hastings, noman might be bolder.
His lordship knows me welland loves me well.
My lord of Ely.
When I was last inHolborn,
I saw good strawberries inyour garden there.
I do beseech you send forsome of them.
Marry, and will, my lord,with all my heart.
Cousin of Buckingham, aword with you.
Catesby hath soundedHastings in our business
and finds the testygentleman so hot
that he will lose his headere give consent
his master's child, asworshipfully he terms it,
shall lose the royalty ofEngland's throne.
Withdraw yourself awhile.
I'll go with you.
We have not yet set downthis day of triumph.
Tomorrow, in my judgment,is too sudden,
for I myself am not sowell provided
as else I would be werethe day prolonged.
Where is my lord, the dukeof Gloucester?
I have sent for thesestrawberries.
His grace looks cheerfullyand smooth today.
There's some conceit orother likes him well
when that he bids goodmorrow with such spirit.
I think there's never aman in Christendom
can lesser hide his loveor hate than he,
for by his face, straightshall you know his heart.
What of his heart perceiveyou in his face
by any livelihood heshowed today?
Marry, that with no manhere he is offended.
For were he, he had shownit in his looks.
I pray God he be not, Isay.
I pray you all,
tell me what they deservethat do conspire my death
with devilish plots ofdamned witchcraft
and that have prevailedupon my body
with their hellish charms.
The tender love I bearyour grace, my lord,
makes me most forward inthis princely presence
to doom the offenders,whatsoe'er they be.
I say, my lord, they havedeserved death.
Then be your eyes thewitness of their evil.
See how I am bewitched.
Behold.
Mine arm is, like a blastedsapling, withered up.
And this is Edward's wife,that monstrous witch,
consorted with that harlotstrumpet Shore,
that by their witchcraftthus have marked me.
If they have done thisdeed, my noble lord--
If! Thou protector of thisdamned strumpet!
Talk'st thou to me of"ifs"?
Thou art a traitor.
Off with his head!
Now by Saint Paul, Iswear,
I will not dine until Isee the same.
Lovel and Ratcliffe, lookthat it be done.
The rest that love me,rise and follow me.
O woe.
Woe for England.
Not a whit for me.
For I, too fond, mighthave prevented this.
Stanley did dream the boardid raze his helm.
And I did scorn it anddistained to fly.
Three times today, myfoot-cloth horse did stumble
and started when he lookedupon the Tower,
as loath to bear me to theslaughterhouse.
Oh, now I need the priestthat spake to me.
I now repent I told thepursuivant as too triumphing
how mine enemies today atPomfret bloodily werebutchered
and I myself secure ingrace and favor.
Oh, Margaret, Margaret.
Now thy heavy curse islighted on poor Hastings'wretched head.
Come, come, dispatch.
The duke would be atdinner.
Make a short shrift.
He longs to see your head.
O momentary grace ofmortal men,
which we more hunt forthan the grace of God.
Who builds his hope in airof your good looks
lives like a drunkensailor on a mast,
ready with every nod totumble down
into the fatal bowels ofthe deep.
Come, come, dispatch.
'Tis bootless to exclaim.
Bloody Richard!
Miserable England.
I prophesy the fearfulesttime to thee
that ever wretched agehath looked upon.
Come.
Lead me to the block.
Bear him my head.
They smile at me whoshortly shall be dead.
Come, cousin.
Canst thou quake andchange thy color,
murder thy breath in themiddle of a word,
and then again begin andstop again
as if thou were distraughtand mad with terror?
Tut, I can counterfeit thedeep tragedian.
Speak and look back.
Pry on every side,
Tremble and start atwagging of a straw,
intending deep suspicion.
Ghastly looks are at myservice like enforced smiles.
And both are ready intheir offices at any time
to grace my stratagems.
What, is Catesby gone?
He is.
And see, he brings themayor along.
Lord mayor!
Look to the drawbridgethere!
Hark, a drum!
Catesby, o'erlook thewalls.
Lord mayor, the reason wehave sent--
Look back! Defend thee!
Here are enemies!
O God and our innocence,defend and guard us.
Be patient; they are friends,Ratcliffe and Lovel.
Here is the head of thatignoble traitor,
the dangerous andunsuspected Hastings.
So dear I loved the manthat I must weep.
I took him for theplainest harmless creature
that breathed upon theearth a Christian,
made him my book whereinmy soul recorded
the history of all hersecret thoughts.
So smooth he daubed hisvice with show of virtue
that his apparent openguilt omitted--
I mean, his conversationwith Shore's wife--
he lived from allattainder of suspects.
Well, well.
He was the covertestsheltered traitor!
Would you imagine oralmost believe,
were't not that by greatpreservation
we live to tell it,
that the subtle traitorthis day
had plotted in the councilhouse
to murder me and my goodlord of Gloucester?
Had he done so?
What?
Think you we are Turks orinfidels?
Or that we would againstthe form of law
proceed thus rashly in thevillain's death,
but that the extreme perilof the case--
the peace of England andour persons' safety--
enforced us to thisexecution?
Now, fair befall you, hedeserved his death.
And your good graces bothhave well proceeded
to warn false traitorsfrom the like attempts.
I never looked for betterat his hands
after he once fell in withMistress Shore.
Yet had we not determinedhe should die
until your lordship cameto see his end,
which now the loving hasteof these our friends,
something against ourmeaning have prevented
because, my lord,
we would have had youheard the traitor speak
and timorously confess
the manner and the purposeof his treason,
that you might well havesignified
the same unto thecitizens,
who haply may misconstrue usin him and wail his death.
But, my good lord, yourgraces' word shall serve
as well as I had seen andheard him speak.
And do not doubt, rightnoble princes both,
but I'll acquaint ourduteous citizens
with all your justproceedings in this cause.
And to that end, we wishedyour lordship here:
to avoid the censures ofthe carping world.
Which, since you came toolate of our intent,
yet witness what you hearwe did intend.
So, my good lord mayor,
we bid farewell.
Go after, after, cousinBuckingham!
The mayor towards Guildhallhies him all in post.
There, at your meet'stadvantage of the time,
infer the bastardy ofEdward's children.
Moreover, urge his hatefulluxury
and bestial appetite inchange of lust,
which stretched unto theirservants, daughters, wives,
even where his raging eyeand savage heart
without control lusted tomake a prey.
Nay, for a need, thus farcome near my person.
Tell them when that mymother went of child
of that insatiate Edward,
noble York, my princelyfather, then had wars inFrance
and by true computation ofthe time
found that the issue wasnot his begot,
which well appeared in hislineaments,
being nothing like thenoble duke my father.
Yet touch this sparingly,as 'twere far off,
because, my lord, you knowmy mother lives.
Doubt not, my lord, I'llplay the orator
as if the golden fee for whichI plead were for myself.
And so, my lord, adieu.
If you thrive well, bringthem to Baynard's Castle,
where you will find mewell accompanied
with reverend fathers andwell-learned bishops.
I go, and towards three orfour o'clock,
look for the news that theGuildhall affords.
Go, Lovel, with all speedto Doctor Shaw.
Go thou to Friar Penker.
Bid them both meet mewithin this hour atBaynard's Castle.
Now will I go to take someprivy order
to draw the brats ofClarence out of sight
and to give notice that nomanner person have any time
recourse unto the princes.
Ratcliffe.
Here is the indictment ofthe good lord Hastings,
which in a set hand fairlyis engrossed
that it may be today reado'er in Paul's.
And mark how well thesequel hangs together.
Eleven hours I have spentto write it over,
for yesternight by Catesbywas it sent me.
The precedent was full aslong a-doing.
And yet within these fivehours, Hastings lived,
untainted, unexamined,free, at liberty.
Here's a good world thewhile.
Who is so gross that cannotsee this palpable device?
Yet who is so bold butsays he sees it not?
Bad is the world, and allwill come to naught
when such ill dealing mustbe seen in thought.
How now? How now? What saythe citizens?
Now, by the holy mother ofour Lord,
the citizens are mum, saynot a word.
Touched you the bastardyof Edward's children?
I did.
With his contract withLady Lucy
and his contract by deputyin France,
the insatiate greedinessof his desire
and his enforcement of thecity wives,
his tyranny for trifle,
his own bastardy, as being got,your father then in France,
and his resemblance beingnot like the duke.
Withal, I did infer yourlineaments
being the right idea ofyour father
both in your form andnobleness of mind.
Laid open all yourvictories in Scotland,
your discipline in war,your wisdom in peace,
your bounty, virtue, fairhumility.
Indeed, left nothing fittingfor your purpose untouched
or slightly handled indiscourse.
And when mine oratory drewto an end,
I bid them that did lovetheir country's good
cry "God save Richard,England's royal king."
And did they so?
No.
God help me, they spakenot a word
but like dumb statues orbreathing stones,
stared each on other andlooked deadly pale,
which, when I saw, Ireprehended them
and asked the mayor whatmeant this willful silence.
His answer was,
the people were not usedto being spoke to
but by the recorder.
Then he was urged to tellmy tale again,
"Thus saith the duke, thushath the duke inferred,"
but nothing spake inwarrant from himself.
When he had done,
some followers of mine ownat the lower end of the hall
hurled up their caps,
and some ten voices cried,"God save King Richard."
Thus I took the vantage ofthose few.
"Thanks, gentle citizensand friends," quoth I.
"This general applause andcheerful shout
argues your wisdoms andyour love to Richard"
and even here brake offand came away.
What tongueless blockswere they!
Would they not speak?
No.
Will not the mayor thenand his brethren come?
The mayor is here at hand.
Intend some fear.
Be not you spoke with butby mighty suit.
And look you get a prayerbook in your hand
and stand between twochurchmen, good my lord.
For on that ground, I'llbuild a holy descant
and be not easily won toour request.
Play the maid's part, stillanswer nay, and take it.
I go.
And if you plead as wellfor them
as I can say nay to theefor myself,
no doubt we bring it to ahappy issue.
Go; go up to the leads.
The lord mayor knocks.
Oh, welcome, my lord.
I dance attendance here.
I think the duke will notbe spoke withal.
Oh, now, Catesby.
What says your lord to myrequest?
He doth entreat yourgrace, my noble lord,
to visit him tomorrow ornext day.
He is within, with tworight reverend fathers,
divinely bent tomeditation,
and in no worldly suitswould he be moved
to draw him from his holyexercise.
Return, good Catesby, tothe gracious duke.
Tell him myself, themayor, and aldermen
in deep designs and matterof great moment,
no less importing than ourgeneral good,
are come to have someconference with his grace.
I'll signify so much untohim straight.
Ah, ha, my lord, thisprince is not an Edward.
He is not lolling on alewd love bed
but on his knees atmeditation,
not dallying with a braceof courtesans
but meditating with twodeep divines,
not sleeping to engrosshis idle body,
but praying to enrich hiswatchful soul.
Happy were England wouldthis virtuous prince
take on his grace thesovereignty thereof.
But sure, I fear, we shallnot win him to it.
Marry, God defend hisgrace should say us nay.
I fear he will.
Here Catesby comes again.
Now, Catesby, what sayshis grace?
He wonders to what end youhave assembled
such troops of citizens tocome to him,
his grace not being warnedthereof before.
He fears, my lord, youmean no good to him.
Sorry I am my noble cousinshould suspect me,
that I mean no good tohim.
By Heaven, we come to himin perfect love.
And so return and tell hisgrace.
When holy and devout religiousmen are at their beads,
'tis much to draw themthence,
so sweet is zealouscontemplation.
See where his grace stands:tween two clergymen.
Two props of virtue for aChristian prince,
to stay him from the fallof vanity.
And, see, a book of prayerin his hand,
true ornaments to know aholy man.
Famous Plantagenet,
most gracious prince,
lend favorable ear to ourrequest
and pardon us theinterruption of thy devotion
and right Christian zeal.
My lord, there needs nosuch apology.
I do beseech your grace topardon me,
who, earnest in theservice of my God,
deferred the visitation ofmy friends.
But leaving this, what isyour grace's pleasure?
Even that, I hope, whichpleaseth God above
and all good men of thisungoverned isle.
I do suspect I have donesome offense
that seems disgracious inthe city's eye
and that you come toreprehend my ignorance.
You have, my lord!
Would it might please yourgrace
on our entreaties to amendthat fault?
Else wherefore breathe Iin a Christian land?
Know then it is your faultthat you resign thesupreme seat,
the throne majestical,
the sceptered office ofyour ancestors
to the corruption of ablemished stock.
Whilst in the mildness ofyour sleepy thoughts,
which here we waken to ourcountry's good,
the noble isle doth wanther proper limbs.
Her face defaced withscars of infamy,
her royal stock graft withignoble plants,
which to recure, weheartily solicit yourgracious self
to take on you the chargeand kingly government
of this your land,
not as protector, steward,substitute,
or lowly factor foranother's gain,
but as successively fromblood to blood,
your right of birth, yourempery, your own.
For this, consorted withthe citizens,
your very worshipful andloving friends,
and by their vehementinstigation,
in this just cause come Ito move your grace.
I cannot tell if to departin silence
or bitterly to speak inyour reproof
best fitteth my degree oryour condition.
If not to answer, youmight haply think
tongue-tied ambition, notreplying,
yielded to bear the goldenyoke of sovereignty
which fondly you wouldhere impose on me.
If to reprove you for thissuit of yours,
so seasoned with yourfaithful love to me,
then, on the other side, Ichecked my friends.
Therefore, to speak and toavoid the first
and then, in speaking, notto incur the last,
definitively thus I answeryou.
Your love deserves mythanks,
but my desert unmeritableshuns your high request.
First, if all obstacleswere cut away
and that my path were evento the crown,
as the ripe revenue anddue of birth,
yet so much is my povertyof spirit,
so mighty and so many mydefects,
that I would rather hideme from my greatness,
being a bark to brook nomighty sea,
than in my greatness covetto be hid
and in the vapor of myglory smothered.
But, God be thanked, thereis no need of me,
and much I need to helpyou, were there need.
The royal tree hath leftus royal fruit,
which, mellowed by thestealing hours of time,
will well become the seatof majesty
and make, no doubt, ushappy by his reign.
On him I lay that youwould lay on me,
the right and fortune ofhis happy stars,
which God defend that Ishould wring from him.
My lord, this arguesconscience in your grace,
but the respects thereofare nice and trivial,
all circumstances wellconsidered.
You say that Edward isyour brother's son.
So say we too...
but not by Edward's wife!
For first was he contractto Lady Lucy--
your mother lives awitness to his vow--
and afterwards by substitutebetroth'd to Bona,
sister to the king ofFrance.
These both put off a poorpetitioner,
a care-crazed mother tomany sons,
a beauty-waning anddistressed widow,
even in the afternoon ofher best days
made prize and purchase ofhis wanton eye,
seduced the pitch and theheight of his degree
to base declension andloathed bigamy.
By her in his unlawfulbed, he got this Edward,
whom our manners call theprince.
More bitterly could Iexpostulate,
save that for reverence tosome alive,
I give a sparing limit tomy tongue.
Therefore, good my lord,take to your royal self
this proffered benefit ofdignity,
if not to bless us and theland withal,
yet to draw forth yournoble ancestry
from the corruption ofabusing times
unto a lineal,true-derived course.
Do, good my lord; yourcitizens entreat you.
Refuse not, mighty lord,this proffered love.
O, make them joyful; granttheir lawful suit.
Alas, why would you heapthis care on me?
I am unfit for state andmajesty.
I do beseech you, take itnot amiss.
I cannot nor I will notyield to you.
If you refuse it-- as inlove and zeal,
loath to depose the child,your brother's son,
as well we know yourtenderness of heart
and gentle, kind,effeminate remorse,
which we have noted in youto your kindred
and equally indeed to allestates--
yet know, whether youaccept our suit or no,
your brother's son shallnever reign our king.
But we shall plant someother in the throne,
to the disgrace anddownfall of your house.
And with this resolution,here we leave you.
Come, citizens.
'Zounds!
I'll entreat no more.
O, do not swear, my lordof Buckingham.
Call them again, sweetprince.
Accept their suit.
If you deny them, all theland will rue it!
Will you enforce me to aworld of cares?
Call them again.
I am not made of stones
but penetrable to yourkind entreaties,
albeit against myconscience and my soul.
Cousin of Buckingham
and sage, grave men...
since you will bucklefortune on my back,
to bear her burden, whe'erI will or no,
I must have patience toendure the load.
But if black scandal orfoul-faced reproach
attend the sequel of yourimposition,
your mere enforcementshall acquittance me
from all the impure blotsand stains thereof.
For God doth know and youmay partly see
how far I am from thedesire of this.
God bless your grace.
We see it and will say it.
In saying so, you shallbut say the truth.
Then I salute you withthis royal title.
Long live Richard,England's worthy king!
Amen.
Tomorrow may it please youto be crowned?
Even when you please, foryou will have it so.
Tomorrow, then, we willattend your grace.
And so most joyfully, wetake our leave.
Come, let us to our holywork again.
Farewell, my cousin.
Farewell, gentle friends.